# 2022 Jan 14 - 28

Last two weeks were about implementing initial version of an Osm Admin grid, integrating it seamlessly with the editing form, and enabling mass-editing of multiple objects.

After finishing it, I realized that Osm Admin had become bigger than Osm Framework! To keep up, I started writing docs for it.

And now, you have a step-by-step guide for [creating a project, adding Osm Admin to it](https://osm.software/docs/admin/getting-started/installation.html) and a [practical example of an admin area](24-data-mass-editing.md) that you can copy to your project and try it out locally. 

More details:

{{ toc }}

### meta.abstract

Last two weeks were about implementing initial version of an Osm Admin grid, integrating it seamlessly with the editing form, and enabling mass-editing of multiple objects.

After finishing it, I realized that Osm Admin had become bigger than Osm Framework! To keep up, I started writing docs for it.

And now, you have a step-by-step guide for *creating a project, adding Osm Admin to it* and a *practical example of an admin area* that you can copy to your project and try it out locally.

## Osm Admin v0.1.5

[Diff](https://github.com/osmphp/admin/compare/v0.1.4...v0.1.5)

### Admin User Interface

Finally, I've got the initial version of the user interface working. Yes, I know, a lot is yet to be implemented, and yet, the transition of seeing some exception stack trace into a page that works is huge!

And I've put a lot of effort into polishing small details. For example: 

* not only grid rows, but also `Create` and `Edit` buttons, are actually links that you can open in a new tab;
* if you click outside a checkbox or a link, there is a high chance it will still work, thanks to property handling of a cell surrounding it;
* filter URLs avoid "ugly" URL encoding by only using characters that don't require encoding;
* ... and more.

Here is how it works (since I shot this screencast, it's got even better :) ):

<div class="flex justify-center">
    <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/SrxXZa5SeMk" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

For more details, read [the whole article](24-data-mass-editing.md). Or even better, add the code sample to a local project and try it out in a browser!   

### Grid Attributes

Define available grid columns using `[#Grid\*]` property attributes, and make some of them visible using `[Grid]` class attribute:

    /**
     * @property string $sku #[Grid\String_('SKU', edit_link: true), ...]
     * @property string $title #[Grid\String_('Title', edit_link: true), ...]
     * @property ?string $description #[Grid\String_('Description'), ...]
     * @property int $qty #[Grid\Int_('Quantity'), ...]
     */
    #[Grid(['sku', 'title', 'qty']), ...]
    class Product extends Object_
    {
        ...
    }   

### Grid Model

Internally, the grid attributes are parsed into the data schema:

    global $osm_app;
    
    $grid = $osm_app->schema
        ->classes[Product::class]
        ->interfaces['table_admin']
        ->grid;
        
    $titleColumn = $grid->columns['title'];

### Documentation

I started writing documentation for Osm Admin:

* [Table of contents](https://osm.software/docs/admin/)
* [Introduction](https://osm.software/docs/admin/getting-started/introduction.html)
* [Installation](https://osm.software/docs/admin/getting-started/installation.html)

I suspect that it will evolve with time, but hey, show me someone wrote the perfect docs in one sit!

## *osm.software* Website v0.4.7

[Diff](https://github.com/osmphp/osmsoftware-website/compare/v0.4.6...v0.4.7)

There a new blog post about [mass-editing feature in Osm Admin](24-data-mass-editing.md).

I've also fixed a couple of bugs. One was untested multi-year blog filter markup, and another was rendering incorrect links in the documentation sidebar.

--- 

I'm just getting started, and a lot more features are yet to come! 

If you've enjoyed reading this, [follow me on Twitter](https://twitter.com/v_osmianski) and be the first to know.