# 2021 Nov 22 - Dec 03

For the last two weeks, I figured out two core features that will allow Osm Admin to stand out from other CRUD applications:

1. It will allow mass editing of data objects.
2. It will automatically propagate data changes throughout the database.

The foundation for the mass editing feature is *data queries*. Data propagation will be ensured via *indexing*.

I've been working on the Osm Admin indexing engine, and it's still in progress. While working on it, I reworked the inner working of data queries. Finally, I've achieved a very clear separation of various Osm Admin concerns, and [documented](01-data-modules.md) it.

In Osm Core, I added reflection over class methods. 

I've already shared various ups and downs of these efforts on Twitter in great detail, so if you are reading this, consider [following me on Twitter](https://twitter.com/v_osmianski) and getting daily updates.

More details:

{{ toc }}

### meta.abstract

For the last two weeks, I figured out two core features that will allow Osm Admin to stand out from other CRUD applications:

1. It will allow mass editing of data objects.
2. It will automatically propagate data changes throughout the database.

The foundation for the mass editing feature is *data queries*. Data propagation will be ensured via *indexing*. 

I've been working on the Osm Admin indexing engine, and it's still in progress. While working on it, I reworked the inner working of data queries. Finally, I've achieved a very clear separation of various Osm Admin concerns, and documented it.

In Osm Core, I added reflection over class methods.

## Osm Admin v0.1.2

[Diff](https://github.com/osmphp/admin/compare/v0.1.1...v0.1.2)

### Queries

In order to SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE or DELETE data objects, use `query()` function:

    // SELECT
    $products = query(Product::class)
        ->equals('in_stock', true)
        ->or(fn(Formula\Operation $q) => $q
            ->null('color')
            ->greater('price', 5.0)
        )
        ->orderBy('title', desc: true)
        ->first('id', 'title', 'category.title');

    // INSERT
    $id = query(Product::class)->insert([
        'sku' => 'P123',
        'title' => 'Osm Admin',
        'price' => 0.0,
        'in_stock' => true,    
    ]);
    
    // UPDATE
    query(Product::class)
        ->greater('price', 5.0)
        ->update(['in_stock' => true]);

    // DELETE
    query(Product::class)
        ->equals('in_stock', false)
        ->delete();
    
In addition to executing an SQL statement, a query:

* validates data;
* converts data objects to/from database records;
* automatically joins related tables requested using dot syntax, for example `category.title`;
* notifies the indexing engine about the changes.  

Queries are already partly implemented. Some query features, such as validation, are yet to be implemented. Some other features, such as `equals()` and other filtering methods, are likely to change in the future. Yet, I'm quite happy with the foundation that's been laid down during this iteration.

Read more:

* [Queries](../11/23-data-queries.md)
* [Better Query Model](../11/24-data-better-query-model.md)
* [Query Formulas](../11/29-data-query-formulas.md)

### Joins

Queries automatically join related table by calling matching join method defined in the data class. For example, `category.title` from the above example internally calls the `join_category()` method:

    class Product extends Object_
    {
        ...
        public function join_category(TableQuery $query, string $joinMethod,
            string $from, string $as): void
        {
            $query->db_query->$joinMethod("categories AS {$as}",
                "{$from}.category_id", '=', "{$as}.id");
        }
    }

Let me explain how it works. The query while processing `category.title` formula infers that the category title should be selected from a related table, and it calls the join method specifying the type of join (`join` or `leftJoin`), the alias of the main selected table (`this`), and the alias of the joined table (`category`); 

    $product->join_category($this, 'leftJoin', 'this', 'category');

It results in the following SQL:

    SELECT category.title
    FROM products AS this
    LEFT OUTER JOIN categories AS category
        ON this.category_id = category.id

Using the dot syntax, you may a distant related table. For example, `category.parent.title` would retrieve the title of the category that is parent to the product's category. 

Joins are fully implemented.

### Indexing

Indexing will propagate changes by running *indexers* - classes that extend the base `Indexer` class:

    #[To('scopes'), From('scopes', name: 'parent')]
    class ScopeIndexer extends TableIndexer
    {
        protected function index_level(?int $parent__level): int {
            return $parent__level ? $parent__level + 1 : 0;
        }
    
        protected function index_id_path(?string $parent__id_path, int $id): string {
            return $parent__id_path ? "{$parent__id_path}/{$id}" : "{$id}";
        }
        
        public function index(bool $incremental = true): void {
            // SELECT data from source tables, and INSERT/UPDATE the target table        
            ...
        }
    }

Indexers will incrementally process changed data. For this purpose, every INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE operation will notify all dependent indexers via *change notification tables*.

I hope to finish indexing in the next iteration.   

Read more:

* [Indexing](../11/18-data-indexing.md)
* [Indexing (2)](../11/22-data-indexing-2.md)


## Osm Core v0.10.14

[Diff](https://github.com/osmphp/core/compare/v0.10.11...v0.10.14)

### Method Reflection

From now on, you can reflect over class methods. For example:

    global $osm_app; /* @var App $osm_app */
    $class = $osm->app->classes[Product::class];
    $method = $class->methods['join_category'];
    
    foreach ($method->parameters as $parameter) {
        ...
    }

### Conditional Serialization

There are properties that should be sometimes serialized, and sometimes not. For example, consider `Scope` class. If you query `title` and `parent.title`, then the `parent` property should be serialized:

    {
        "title": "Child scope",
        "parent": {
            "title": "Parent scope"
        }
    } 

However, if you decide to store all scopes in a tree-like model, then `parent` property should not be serialized:

    {
        "title": "Parent scope",
        "children": [
            {
                "title": "Child scope"
                // not parent property
            }
        ]
    }

For such properties, use `not_having` conditional serialization:
    
    /**
     * @property Scope $parent #[Serialized(not_having: 'children')]
     * @property Scope[] $children #[Serialized]
     */
    class Scope extends Object_ {
    } 

## *osm.software* Website v0.4.4

[Diff](https://github.com/osmphp/osmsoftware-website/compare/v0.4.3...v0.4.4)

### New Content

I wrote a lot about implementing queries and indexing in Osm Admin:

* [Indexing (2)](../11/22-data-indexing-2.md)
* [Queries](../11/23-data-queries.md)
* [Better Query Model](../11/24-data-better-query-model.md)
* [Query Formulas](../11/29-data-query-formulas.md)
* [Modules](01-data-modules.md)
